Well, perhaps we could take out Bibles and turn to Colossians chapter 3 and verse 13.
And let's analyze this verse together and see what is it that Jehovah expects of us.
So in Colossians 3-13, it says continue putting up with one another
and forgiving one another freely, even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another.
Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.
Or certainly this verse gives us plenty of food for thought, doesn't it?
Are areas in which perhaps we can work on and improve in?
But what two things stand out as being required of us?
Well, looking back, you notice the first one, continue putting up with one another
and then the second point, forgiving one another freely.
Well, let's look at that first expression, continue putting up with one another.
What's the difference between these two expressions?
Well, we're told that this first expression doesn't refer to serious sins,
but perhaps talks about things that are irritating, annoying,
things that we may not necessarily have a cause for complaint concerning,
but they still get us very upset anyway.
These minor things.
What are some of the things that annoy you? Let's be honest.
Are you annoyed when someone is always late?
Are you annoyed when they're always early?
Are you annoyed when someone is outspoken?
Does it annoy you when someone's too quiet?
It's amazing, isn't it? What are the things that annoy us?
I remember back in the 70s, Brother Norgever, an outstanding talk
where he alluded to the fact that maybe there's a sister in the congregation
and she's hearing this other sister, new in the truth,
answering up time after time, and then her heart she's thinking,
why doesn't she just keep quiet?
Well, maybe we've all experienced those feelings.
And if we're judged on them, perhaps we'll agree.
Well, it's not justified. I don't really have a cause,
but it still irritates me.
It's true, isn't it? The expression sometimes,
it's not the mountains ahead of us that cause problems.
It's the pebble in the shoe.
And it's sometimes the small things that irritate us the most.
I remember when I was serving in Western Samoa many years ago
at the branch, we had quite a number of brothers
from overseas working on construction.
And there was one brother who had the habit,
first in the morning, as he arrived before breakfast,
saying, good morning to everyone.
Some found that annoying.
Maybe you can relate to that.
And no doubt you feel very happy when you read the scripture
in Proverbs 27, 14, where it says in one translation,
a loud and cheerful greeting early in the morning
is taken as a curse.
You may be thinking, amen to that.
And that brother ceased his habit after he read that scripture,
or at least it was read to him.
But we may not always be able to find a scripture
that backs up this irritation that we feel.
So what do we do? Well, what does it say?
Continue putting up with one another.
Continue. It's something that we just have to keep on doing.
That brings us to the second part of our verse,
forgiving one another freely.
It's interesting when we look at other translations
of this verse, most follow the King James version
and just say, forgive.
The New York translation says, forgive freely.
The reason is that this isn't your normal Greek word
for forgiveness.
It denotes generosity, a willingness
to go beyond what's required.
It's interesting that the Watchtow,
even back in 1882, was using that expression
to forgive one another freely,
well before the time of the New World translation.
So this gives us something to think about
because it's not just a matter of forgiving,
but we need to be generous about forgiving.
We have to be willing to, as it were,
bestow a pardon on someone who really doesn't deserve that pardon.
Now, why should we be interested in developing
and working on these two aspects,
putting up with one another and forgiving freely?
Well, we've heard the reasons many times before, haven't we?
The first one, of course, is that your hover has forgiven us.
And if we turn back just one chapter,
chapter two of Colossians,
and verse 13, this point is highlighted for us.
It says in chapter two, verse 13,
furthermore though, you were dead in your trespasses
and in the uncircumcised state of your flesh,
God made you alive together with him.
He kindly forgave you all,
or forgave us all our trespasses.
So this is the model that your hover has given us.
It's true, we sometimes can find some reason
why we feel we don't have to forgive someone else.
But remember the illustration Jesus gave
of the slave who had the huge dead.
If you calculated in Daenerys,
there were 60 million Daenerys that he owed.
He was forgiven that.
Then he went after the other man
with who owed him just a small amount.
But have you ever thought, if you asked that slave,
maybe he would say, well, it's true.
I really appreciate having everything forgiven,
but I still don't have any money.
I need some money.
So that's why I wanted to get the other slave
to give me the money.
Well, there's always a reason, isn't it?
Even if it's a distorted reason,
as to why we don't follow Jehovah's example.
But looking back at Colossians three, verse 13,
what does it say?
If anyone has a cause for complaint,
against another.
So that gives us a good idea, doesn't it?
The second reason, of course, is that
we do need others to forgive us.
The very things that annoy us and irritate us in others
are sometimes the same things that we do to others.
Have you ever noticed that?
And how annoying it is when someone points that out to you?
You're annoyed with that person?
Don't you realize what you do?
Well, that's something good for us to remember,
isn't it?
The fact that we do need to have others forgive us.
And then another reason is that it maintains the peace
within the Christian congregation.
The watchtower made the comment on this.
It said that in countries where our work is restricted
or under ban, many of our brothers
have to meet together in smaller groups.
And when you do that, you get to know
everyone's weaknesses, idiosyncrasies.
It's so much easier to be annoyed by others
when you're dealing with small groups of persons.
The watchtower then made the comment,
what good training it is for us now
to learn how to put up with one another
when we're in larger groups, because later,
we may need to worship Jehovah in smaller groups.
So it's good training for us as we keep peace
in the congregation.
And what can help us?
Well, there are many different things
that can help us in this regard.
The one point in the marginal reference,
you see there is first Peter chapter four in verse eight.
And that's where it tells us we need to have
intense love for one another.
Not just love, but intense love.
And this word intense means full strength.
Literally, it means to stretch out our love.
So as we come across these things
that irritate us and annoy us in life,
or if we come across persons
who actually do sin against us,
what should we keep in mind?
Continue putting up with one another.
Continue freely forgiving one another.